Topcu, 2020, The impact of COVID-19 on emerging stock markets

This paper, written by Mert Topcu, investigates how the initial months of the COVID-19 (C19) pandemic affected 26 emerging stock markets between the 10th of March 2020 and the 30th of April 2020. The study examined daily data on stock market returns, exchange rates, oil prices, and C19 infection rates, applying a panel regression model estimated with Driscoll-Kraay standard errors to account for heteroskedasticity, serial correlation, and cross-sectional dependence.

Initially, C19 had a significant negative impact on emerging stock markets. The biggest impact on the stock market was during March, particularly during the last 20 days of March - during this period, a one-unit increase in infection rate was associated with a 0.153% decline in stock market performance. However, as this period moved forward into April, the effect diminished notably. By the 17th of April, the estimated impact was not even statistically significant anymore, suggesting that the markets were starting to stabilise - this was likely due to increasing policy responses and the belief that the spread of the virus was beginning to be contained.

Exchange rate depreciation and oil price shocks also had consistently negative effects on the stock markets throughout the study period. The observed effects were robust and statistically significant across all sample divisions, reflecting the broader financial vulnerabilities of emerging economies in the face of external crises.

There were substantial differences between different regions. The emerging stock markets in Asia experienced the most severe impacts from the pandemic, followed by the South American and Middle Eastern markets. The author found it quite surprising that the Central and Eastern European markets were the least affected - this was likely due to their faster public health and economic responses. Following on from this observation, the study found that the countries who acted efficiently with their public health measures, or invested larger stimulus packages, experienced milder negative impacts on their stock markets. These findings highlight the important of timely and responsible Government responses.

Regarding the policy implications, the author stresses, as they found in the above paragraph, early and aggressive interventions, both in terms of public health and the economy, helped protect the stock markets against the shock of the pandemic. By mid-April, these measured seemed to have restored some investor confidence. This paper highlights the immediate and severe economic impacts of an airborne disease such as C19, but does also note that the observed effects were only temporary and that longer-term impacts should be examined in the future.
