Dubey, 2020, Psychosocial impact of COVID-19

Summary

This review examines the wide-ranging psychosocial consequences of the COVID-19 (C19) pandemic, emphasising that in some cases, the psychological and social toll of the crises is greater than the real Biological threat of the virus. The authors argue that a combination of the uncertainty, global spread of the virus, and the lockdown measures, triggered mass anxiety, distress, and potentially other long-term psychiatric disorders across all sections of society.

Stigma and Mental Health

C19, like the previous SARS outbreak, is marked by social stigmatisation of those who are infected and even the healthcare providers that treat them. The fear of being labelled as someone who is "C19 positive" often leads to them hiding their symptoms and where they have travelled, which of course in turn affects public health efforts and drives discrimination, marginalisation, and even in some cases, violence.

Quarantine and Isolation Effects

Mandatory isolation and lockdowns have lead to notable psychological impacts, these include things like fear, loneliness, frustration, and in the worst cases, resulting PTSD. Prolonged quarantine has been found to correlate with an increase in mental health issues and social rejection which amplifies the individuals distress. Not only the infected individuals, but health care workers in quarantine also feel especially isolated, whilst children who are separated from their parents/caregivers may experience developmental and emotional setbacks.

Role of Social Media and Misinformation

The authors describe this pandemic as being paralleled by an 'infodemic' - this can be used to describe the waves of misinformation, fake news, and conspiracy theories that spread via social media, this has only worsened the panic among the general public and even led to irrational behaviours and some people undergoing therapeutic misadventures. Certain online content undermines public trust and rules put in place to fight the pandemic - often fuelling racism, particularly anti-Chinese sentiment.

Healthcare Providers' Mental Health Crisis

Frontline workers face an unprecedented psychological strain due to a number of factors including exposure risk, overwork, PPE shortages, and a general fear of infecting their friends and families through their line of work. As a result of their work, many frontline workers suffer from depression, insomnia, burnout, PTSD, whilst some may turn to substance abuse as an escape. Some experience societal backlash, including assault and home evictions. Alternatively, those who are not involved with delivering some healthcare service may feel guilt and without purpose. Some medical trainees, who are fast-tracked and thrown into the deep-end, may also struggle emotionally as a result of being underprepared.

Impact Across Society

	• Children: Routine disruption, lack of peer interaction, parental stress leading to anxiety, other behavioural issues, and trauma. Online education also has its own burdens associated with it.
	• Elderly: Heightened risk of dying from C19 which leads to general increased fear. May also suffer from loneliness, cognitive decline, and limited access to healthcare services.
	• Caregivers: Those tending to sick family members at home may experience emotional exhaustion, helplessness, and secondary traumatic stress.
	• Marginalised Communities: Those who may be migrants, daily wage workers, slum dwellers, and prisoners are at a greater risk to the vulnerabilities associated with the pandemic, such as a lack of healthcare, hygiene, shelter, income, and food. Members of these communities often bare stigmatism and criminalisation, often suffering from resulting untreated psychological distress - leading to increased suicide and rights violation.
	• The General Public: We all witnessed the fear of C19 leading to panic-buying, xenophobia, and widespread emotional instability. Large-scale studies based in China found high levels of anxiety, depression, and PTSD-like symptoms, particularly among the younger generation, students, and those already suffering from pre-existing mental health conditions. Misinformation and economic hardship only fans the flames of this fire.
	• Homeless Populations: Lockdown policies did not adequately address the needs of the homeless population, who are of course unable to properly isolate or maintain good hygiene. Due to the pandemic and their condition, many suffered from chronic mental illness and have now been left with an increased vulnerability to other diseases and social stigma.
	• People with Pre-existing Mental Illness: People that are already suffering from mental illnesses are particularly vulnerable to infection but more worryingly, a relapse in their mental condition, especially if their routines are broken or their medication becomes inaccessible. OCD, anxiety disorders, and health-related delusions can be exacerbated by the pandemic.

Role of Mental Health Professionals

The authors pushed for integrated, technology-driven, mental health interventions. Mental health professionals should be explicitly included in C19 responses. Vulnerable groups should be identified and also included in policy. Psychological support is vital for healthcare providers - hospitals should establish entire mental health wards to address the emotional needs of both their patients and their staff.

Recommendations

This paper calls for Governments and other policy-making bodies to prevent the spread of misinformation, establish mental health services, and address the various social stigmas. Authorities must ensure that they provide accurate and transparent communication, psychological support, and safeguard the aforementioned marginalised communities. Online platforms and hotlines should be developed to promote mental health awareness. Finally, the authors see the C19 pandemic as an opportunity to reflect on our societal values and to build systems resilient to future crises.

Conclusion

Airborne diseases, like C19, are not only biomedical disasters, but they are also psychosocial disasters too. Their unfortunate legacies will not just include illness and death, but also widespread psychological trauma.
